Intermediate Acting with Shakespeare

Do you have some experience on stage and want to take it to the next level?
This 8 Week course will help you polish your skills and prepare for your next stage or screen role.
Using prepared texts from Shakespeare you'll unlock the secrets to performing both classical and modern pieces.
The course handles vocal techniques, rehearsal and memorization methodologies, how to use improvization to build a performance, how to keep your audience engaged, and how to perform Shakespeare's plays as they were originally intended.
Some acting experience and knowledge of Shakespeare will be helpful, and you should have at least B2-level English skills. You should be willing and able to memorize at least 1 Shakespeare speech (~20 lines, examples will be provided) in preparation for the course.
To apply please send your "Actor's CV" including your stage and/or screen experience.



1. Acting in Shakespeare's time and beyond
1.1 Introduction Game
- Throwing balls up and down. Try to match the rhythm of others. Start reciting lines: throw on last stress, catch on first stress.
- Why is this difficult?
We're having to keep track of the balls.
We're having to keep track of each other.
We're having to keep track of the words.
The only thing we have control over is the words. So if we don't have to worry about the words any more, we've only got two things we can't control. And if we don't have to worry about each other, we only have to worry about the balls. And if we practice long enough with the balls then we don't have to worry about anything at all. And then we can start acting.
- Hausordnung
- Warm up
- Come up one by one, no need to rush, so I can tick everyone off and do the admin. While that's happening everyone else will be warming up. 
- Warmups: Always start at the head and move down. Think of an invisible string out of the top of the head being pulled slightly for posture. Massage your thumbs into your eyesockets. Be very careful with your neck: use no more than the weight of your hand to stretch it; never roll it around. Shoulders, pick invisible apples. Chest needs to be stretched too so some of those good old yoga poses will help. Stretch your back by bending down slowly and if you can touch your toes you're doing better than me. Come up the slower the better, vertebra by vertebra. What you want to do with your hips and legs and feet is up to you. All in your own time. I'll be sitting over there so just come up when you're ready.
- Name and one interesting fact.
- Three rounds of tag
- Throw the ball to someone whose name you don't say and to whom you don't walk-game.
- More tag. Play the game again. See if we can speed it up.
- Finally play the first game again - speaking + throwing.

Okay let's sit down.
1.2 Agreement and Consent


1.3 Responsibilities of and actor

2. Learning the Text
2.1 Memory Palaces
2.2 Line by line
2.3 Moving and Speaking

3. Rhythm and Voice
What an actor is not3.1 Speedboat beat
3.2 Greek HelmetWhat an actor is not
3.3 In Chorus

4. Working Together
4.1 Throw and Catch
4.2 Shooting Arrows
4.3 Don't Interrupt Me/Whisper the speech/Do you really want to know?

5. Warm-up Games
55.1 Voice (mm-mm-mmmm, im-om-immm)
5.2 Relaxation and Meditation
5.3 Moving (throw+catch, Throw The Ball To Someone Whose Name You Don't Say And To Whom You Don't Walk)

6. Working with the Text 1
7. Working with the Text 2
8. Performance


1.1 Introduction Game
1.2 Agreement and Consent
1.3 What an actor is not

2.1 Memory Palaces
2.2 Line by line
2.3 Moving and Speaking

3.1 Speedboat beat
3.2 Greek Helmet
3.3 In Chorus

4.1 Throw and Catch
4.2 Shooting Arrows
4.3 Don't Interrupt Me


