Intermediate Acting with Shakespeare

Do you have some experience on stage and want to take it to the next level?
This 8 Week course will help you polish your skills and prepare for your next stage or screen role.
Using prepared texts from Shakespeare you'll unlock the secrets to performing both classical and modern pieces.
The course handles vocal techniques, rehearsal and memorization methodologies, how to use improvization to build a performance, how to keep your audience engaged, and how to perform Shakespeare's plays as they were originally intended.
Some acting experience and knowledge of Shakespeare will be helpful, and you should have at least B2-level English skills. You should be willing and able to memorize at least 1 Shakespeare speech (~20 lines, examples will be provided) in preparation for the course.
To apply please send your "Actor's CV" including your stage and/or screen experience.



1. Acting in Shakespeare's time and beyond
1.1 Introduction Game
- Throwing balls up and down. Try to match the rhythm of others. Start reciting lines: throw on last stress, catch on first stress.
- Why is this difficult?
We're having to keep track of the balls.
We're having to keep track of each other.
We're having to keep track of the words.
The only thing we have control over is the words. So if we don't have to worry about the words any more, we've only got two things we can't control. And if we don't have to worry about each other, we only have to worry about the balls. And if we practice long enough with the balls then we don't have to worry about anything at all. And then we can start acting.
- Hausordnung
- Warm up
- Come up one by one, no need to rush, so I can tick everyone off and do the admin. While that's happening everyone else will be warming up. 
- Warmups: Always start at the head and move your way down. Think of an invisible string out of the top of the head being pulled slightly for posture. Massage your thumbs into your eyesockets. Be very careful with your neck: use no more than the weight of your hand to stretch it; never roll it around. Shoulders, pick invisible apples. Chest needs to be stretched too so some of those good old yoga poses will help. Stretch your back by bending down slowly and if you can touch your toes you're doing better than me. Come up the slower the better, vertebra by vertebra. What you want to do with your hips and legs and feet is up to you. All in your own time. I'll be sitting over there so just come up when you're ready.
- Name and one interesting fact.
- Three rounds of tag
- Throw the ball to someone whose name you don't say and to whom you don't walk-game.
- More tag. Play the game again. See if we can speed it up.
- Finally play the first game again - speaking + throwing.

Okay let's sit down.
1.2 Agreement and Consent
Before we get further into Shakespeare, if everyone agrees, I'd like to go into why we're doing this workshop. What we're presenting here is a collection of things that I've done working with one of my old acting groups. It started out as a Masterclass, and once that was over about fifteen of us got together and started working on a production of Midsummer Night's Dream using the techniques we'd used in the Masterclass. We chose MSND basically because it made economic sense: people know it, they'll come to see it, it's quite fun to watch it outdoors in a park in midsummer, all that sort of stuff. 
The reason why we're doing this in Leipzig now is because we're looking for actors. We've got shows coming up in March and September and in June as well if we're lucky, and we need people to come on board. And this is as good a way as any as finding out who's interested in working with us. This isn't an audition, or a competition. If you want in, then you're in. We'd just like to get to know you first.

One thing we're working on right now is an agreement that we would give to actors, which goes through some obvious and some not so obvious things that actors are expected to do. And this is important because if you do any paid acting work for any company you'll probably have to sign something similar to it. You will certainly be expected to know a lot of the things in the agreement. I don't like to simplify but it basically boils down to always treating people with respect, and that if something makes you uncomfortable, it's ok to say so. 

Before anyone gets delusions of grandeur about becoing a professional actor - which is perfectly possible - what we're also trying to build here is a community of people who are interested in the theatre. And you can go home and tell your friends about this: your skillset doesn't really matter, we'll find some work for you to do.

So - why Shakespeare
1.3 Responsibilities of and actor
Because there are a lot of playwrights out there; but for some reason we keep coming back to this four hundred year old English guy. And I could never understand exactly why. I studied Computer Science, the only Shakespeare I know is from high school, it's not that I'm not interested in that stuff it was just a lot of effort to get in to Shakespeare and almost every performance I saw on stage I actively hated. Now things have changed slightly: I still actively hate almost every Shakespeare performance I see, but Shakespeare itself is just the most fun ever. I really feel that someone should have told me that earlier. Now Shakespeare was working under some very tight constraints. He was living in a time when it was very rare for people to write things down or know how to read them, but because he still had to advertise, the only thing he could rely on was word of mouth. And because there really are only so many ways of saying the words "Oh my god you have to see this show" Shakespeare needed to put his own words in there. So he needed words that were very easy to remember.

The other thing was his programme. He didn't have the luxury of month-long runs of a single play where he could fine tune with a director's chisel every single movement and gesture and nuance of the text. He literally couldn't do that. He had to run a repertoire of plays, sometimes two different ones on the same day, with the same group of actors, except for the one who got sick and had to be replaced at the very last minute, and then of course you had to remember the Queen could summon them at a moment's notice and demand from them any play she wanted, and literally just round the corner from the Globe Theatre in London in the early sixteen hundreds you could go and watch a bear fight and Shakespeare had to compete for attention from that. 

So not only a large catalogue of plays, that any and all of his actors could perform at a moment's notice, but also need to have memorable scenes and lines that people would recite to their friends to make them see the show, and the shows have got to be really good too because otherwise people will get bored and go and see the bears instead.

Shakespeare was an actor as well, but he was mainly a writer, so the only thing that he had control over was the words that went in to his plays. And to oversimplify things a LOT, his main goal was memorability. Actors tend to forget lines: how do you prevent that? You make the lines as easy to remember as possible. What's the seventeenth-century equivalent of a film teaser? It's your friend who saw the show yesterday reciting some of the lines from it. How does Shakespeare make sure that can happen? He makes the lines as easy to remember as possible.

So the question is why we have trouble remembering Shakespeare's lines.

Shakespeare was no nobleman, he was definitely no more than middle class, but he was lucky enough to get at least a bit of a classical education when he was a boy. What that meant in England at those times was a study of Latin, and there was a reason for that. If you want to study in Law in many countries it's important to know Latin because so much law is based on things the Ancient Romans came up with, and the reason for that is that the Romans came up with some pretty solid law. Which is amazing because they had some serious constraints.

Never mind people not reading or writing, Romans didn't have paper. Before anything got written down, you had to make extremely sure that it was right, because writing involved carving letters into solid stone. Again, I'm oversimplifying a LOT. That meant that if you had an amazing idea, you couldn't just get it set down in stone, as the saying goes, without everyone checking it and going over it and poking holes in it and fixing it so that it was right. And you couldn't write people letters outlining your key points for them to take home and consider in depth because to do that you'd first have to carve the letter out of stone. The only way you could make sure that people thought about and remembered your idea, or your case for the prosecution, or for the defence, was to make sure you entirely engaged your audience whenever you stated your case. And because that was a very important skill, the Romans devoted some time and study as to how to achieve it, and that is why we have rhetoric.

Rhetoric is basically the study of making a speech engaging. If you were a prosecution lawyer in Ancient Rome, it was your job to convince the jury that the accused was guilty. To do that you needed to know what the story of the crime was, how the accused was involved in it, what he did. You then needed to pick out the bits of the story which are most relevant to your goal of putting this guy in jail, and play them up a bit in your speech. You also had to consider your style and tone: what might be acceptable in the case of the guy who maybe stole some oranges, would perhaps not go down so well at the trial of someone who was accused of murder. Then you needed to remember all of these facts in your story, and then you needed to make sure that everyone could hear you, because what was the point of doing all of that preparation if the guys in the back row miss half of what you say.

And those became the five canons of rhetoric: so that's Inspiration, the story; Disposition, how you arrange the story, Elocution which is the style (and confusing because elocution means something completely different in modern days), and then memory and pronunciation. And it's almost certain that young Shakespeare was taught about this in school, and used these five canons to create presentations in class. You could say that in writing his plays he gave you the Inspiration, the Disposition and the Style, and then the memory and pronunciation are up to you as an actor, but Shakespeare actually handled the memory and the pronunciation for you as well. Pretty much any great speech from Shakespeare gives you all five canons of Rhetoric all at the same time. And because he also economically squeezes all this information into such a small space, you have the fun of watching it all unfold when you perform it, and you will send audience members home repeating words that you said.







2. Learning the Text
2.1 Memory Palaces
2.2 Line by line
2.3 Moving and Speaking

3. Rhythm and Voice
What an actor is not3.1 Speedboat beat
3.2 Greek HelmetWhat an actor is not
3.3 In Chorus

4. Working Together
4.1 Throw and Catch
4.2 Shooting Arrows
4.3 Don't Interrupt Me/Whisper the speech/Do you really want to know?

5. Warm-up Games
55.1 Voice (mm-mm-mmmm, im-om-immm)
5.2 Relaxation and Meditation
5.3 Moving (throw+catch, Throw The Ball To Someone Whose Name You Don't Say And To Whom You Don't Walk)

6. Working with the Text 1
7. Working with the Text 2
8. Performance


1.1 Introduction Game
1.2 Agreement and Consent
1.3 What an actor is not

2.1 Memory Palaces
2.2 Line by line
2.3 Moving and Speaking

3.1 Speedboat beat
3.2 Greek Helmet
3.3 In Chorus

4.1 Throw and Catch
4.2 Shooting Arrows
4.3 Don't Interrupt Me


